>>JAY DYER: Is there a deeper,
hidden, more esoteric meaning
to the Hollywood films
that we all love to watch?
I'm Jay Dyer.
>>JAY WEIDNER: And
I'm Jay Weidner,
and you're watching
"Hollywood Decoded".
MUSIC PLAYING
>>DYER: Today we're
going to be talking
about The Lord of
the Rings Trilogy.
And we chose this
film for many reasons.
It's not just a tale
of the perennial forces
of good and evil battling
it out over the ages.
It also, I think, operates
on about four or five
different levels.
You have, on the one
hand, ancient history that
Tolkien himself said was real.
On another level, you have
the mythological aspects
that tie in to a lot of Greek
mythology and ancient Hindu
mythology.
On another level, you have
an alchemical hermetic aspect
to this trilogy.
And then lastly, I
think you actually
have a kind of
prophetic significance
to a warning about what's
coming in the future,
and that we will be saved
from the coming disasters.
Jay, what do you think?
>>WEIDNER: Well, I
think you're right.
I think that it's quite
obvious that this story's
about the end of the age,
the end of the third age,
and the beginning
of the fourth age.
And I think Tolkien has
gone back into the Kalevala
and realizes the Finnish
myths, and realized
that these were actually
true, that through the study
of etymology, of word,
that he was getting
some kind of secret history.
And I think there's a
lot of truth in doing--
an historical endeavor
through language, I think,
has a lot of great credibility.
So what I mean by this is
that Tolkien would frequently
drive around the
countryside in England
on Sundays with his
wife and with CS Lewis.
And he would stop at
an ancient street name
in the back country of England.
And he would explain
what the word meant,
who the people
were that named it,
what their whole way of life
was like, that they were farmers
or they raised
cattle or whatever.
And he could tell it
all from just the name.
And he used this same kind of
technique with the Kalevala.
He would take a word and
he would go backwards.
So if you take a word, any
word in the English language,
it has a huge history of use.
And you can understand
our history,
history of
English-speaking people,
through the study of English.
>>DYER: Yes.
>>WEIDNER: And he just
did the same thing
with the study of the
ancient Finnish texts.
And so this is the story
of the age, the third age,
and at the end of
the third age, all
of the wild and crazy
beings that populated
Europe and the Earth at
the time are leaving,
and it's now having
the age of men.
And Sauron as the
evil lord who's
trying to stop
the end of the age
from occurring because
he knows that means it's
the end of his power.
>>DYER: Exactly.
>>WEIDNER: So I
think in the end,
this is an amazing
mythology that Tolkien
wrote because he had
gone to World War I
with all of the buddies in
his little town in England.
And they all died
except for Tolkien.
And as he was recovering
from his wounds,
he kind of vowed
to himself that he
would dedicate his
life to finding a way
around these kinds of problems.
And when he moved
from South Africa
to near Manchester, England,
he saw the beginning
of the industrial age
as it struck Europe,
and he saw the great
forests being taken down
by the industrialists,
and he lamented this.
He would sit and
cry, his mom said,
as he watched the
trees being cut down.
So again, you see
that Tolkien thought
we're at the end
of our fourth age,
and he's trying to draw
a reflection about what
the end of the third age looks
like so that as we approach
the end of the fourth age
right now, as he thought,
it would be easier on us.
>>DYER: I think there's
a lot of parallels
to a lot of religious
mythology that's very crucial.
So at the beginning
of the film we're
going to see a
clip where we have
kind of the back story of
the origin of these races.
And Tolkien is literally
telling us about--
sort of in a quasi-angelic
race of elves,
we have humans that are a
kind of royal bloodline,
the Dunedain, all
of this is going
to be under the aegis
of a kind of deception
that's foisted upon the
races by this evil figure
Sauron, who, as
we're going to see,
connects to Satan or to Saturn.
So let's look at the
clip of the introduction.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- For none now live
who remember it.
It began with the
forging of great rings.
Three were given to the elves,
immortal, wisest, and fairest
of all beings; seven
to the dwarf lords,
great miners and craftsmen
of the mountain halls;
and nine, nine rings were
gifted to the race of men,
who above all else desire power.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>DYER: So here we have the
laying out of the temptation.
And really, that is
the essence of what
the struggle is of this film.
It's going to be a
David and Goliath story.
It's going to be courage in the
face of despair and disaster.
But what's interesting is
that this ring is, in a way,
dark sorcery, and it's
connected to technology.
And that's going to come up many
times in the clips in the film
because with Sauron,
for example, is going
to explain that it's
the machine of war
that he's working for
at the behest of Sauron.
He's the evil wizard who
goes from good to bad.
But what this is
is a temptation.
It's a temptation
to all the races.
It's a spiritual
temptation to seek power
for the sake of raw power.
And as a result, it keeps the
races and the peoples divided,
and they all fight
amongst each other.
That's the history
back into "The Hobbit",
"The Silmarillion",
the earlier texts
that are the background
of this story.
And that's why the
success is going
to come through
Gandalf essentially
being a kind of
geopolitical chess master,
arranging a great gambit
with salvation occurring
through the most humble of
means to little bitty hobbit
guys marching into Mordor to
destroy this ring of power
because it's a trap.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah.
And we should also note
that 19 rings are given out
to the citizens of Middle Earth.
But in secret Sauron
creates another ring,
and this ring is the ring
that rules those other rings.
And so Sauron has been able to
use the ring as a controlling
device to keep
control and to watch
because it's also a
surveillance kind of operation.
Tolkien called the
ring the machine,
that to him, the
industrial age represented
this completely destructive
force that was going
to destroy all life on Earth.
And so the ring becomes
that destructive force.
>>DYER: Yes.
>>WEIDNER: And also it should
be noted that the ring gives you
extended life, but it's a fake
extended life, because once you
lose the ring you
age rapidly and die.
And this is not a good thing.
So the ring offers you
gifts, but at a huge price.
>>DYER: Yeah.
And this is
essentially the offer
that we have from
transhumanism and technology
is that its misuse is
kind of a deception,
that, oh, you're
going to live forever.
You're going to have all
these great advantages.
But there's a dark
side to it that
comes up throughout
the films consistently.
And it's actually explained
to be the war machine.
It's almost like he's
seeing the Pentagon,
the military industrial
complex being built up,
as a result of World War I that
you talked about, into World
War II and the Cold War.
And so that's how I
see it as a warning.
And we actually
will be, I think,
successful in destroying
the new world order,
and we will return to a more
kind of organic existence.
And that's literally
what he's saying,
that these ancient
ages and cycles,
they've already happened.
We've already
experienced these things,
and it's kind of stuck in
our collective race memories,
if you will.
>>WEIDNER: That's exactly right.
And I think when
you examine it, he's
saying that every end of the
age, evil solidifies its power
and attempts to
control everyone.
But evil always underestimates
us and our power.
And again, going
back to Gandalf,
it's really fascinating.
Gandalf is manipulating
everybody in this movie,
everybody except for Sauron.
And he sends the
hobbits into Mordor
because he doesn't
believe that Sauron
is going to even see them
or even care about them,
and that they have no power.
But of course, the
smallest of creatures
in Middle Earth is the ones
that actually did destroy--
did have the tenacity to go
forward and destroy the ring.
But I will note,
even in the end,
Frodo does not destroy the ring.
It's Gollum's greed which
gets the ring destroyed.
>>DYER: You know,
Gandalf is interesting
because he's this sort
of sage mystic saint who
walks amidst the immortal
elves and the humans.
He meets at the
Council of Elrond,
which is kind of the
overwatchers, the overseers
of Middle Earth.
And they really plan this
out in a kind of secret way.
And the reason that he
has to deceive everyone
is because he can't
let that get out.
It's such a dangerous gambit
that he's sending in the ring
into Mordor with this
humble little spy,
that it's too risky
to tell anybody.
But it's an amazing
picture, also,
on the geopolitical
level, as well as
spiritual and mythological.
But we want to look at Gandalf
as also a kind of alchemical
spiritual transformation because
he goes from a grey order
wizard, and does his descent,
which is the Greek mythological
tradition of the catabasis,
which you see this in Homer,
you see this in Virgil
in "The Aeneid".
The hero has to go through the
descent into the underworld,
face the spirits of
death, and then re-emerge
on the other side.
And so I think we want
to look at this servant
of the secret fire and consider
how Gandalf is actually
part of the secret
order that keeps
these secrets because they're
too dangerous to be let out.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah.
And I think that there is--
in mythology, there is
this idea that there
is a secret order which
is kind of watching over
us and protecting
us from great evil.
And the hermits, for instance,
were hermetic scholars that
lived in medieval times,
but they lived alone
and they studied hermeticism,
so they were called hermits.
And what the hermits, the
rumors of the hermits were,
was that they would
come into a town
and use their magic to make
the village better, more happy.
>>DYER: So let's look at The
Servant of the Secret Fire
clip.
And this is important
because it's also
going to show us the revelation
of the underworld, which
is very important in terms
of Hades, the realm of death,
and the overcoming of death.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- You cannot pass.
- Gandalf!
- I am a servant
of the secret fire,
wielder of the flame of Anor.
The Dark Flame will not
avail you, Flame of Udun.
Go back to the shadow.
You shall not pass.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>DYER: So Gandalf is
basically a white magician.
He's a servant of the Secret
Fire, the Flame of Arnor,
which in Tolkien's mythology
symbolizes the sun.
So he represents the forces
of good, of light, of warmth.
And in every one of the cases of
the characters, what they have
to do is face up to some
challenge before they progress
to the next level, so to speak.
And in Gandalf's
case, it's actually
a deeper esoteric level.
He's actually going
to become a higher
level wizard as a result of
this battling with this demon.
But it's amazing to me
that Tolkien is actually
pulling not just from ancient
mythology in Greece and India
and so forth, Nordic
mythology, but this is also
mentioned in Genesis 6.
You have the story of the fallen
angels that are imprisoned
in Hades in the abyss.
The Bridge of Khazad
Dum, in this scene,
is spoken of as over the abyss.
It's literally the
bridge between this world
and the underworld, the next
world, the world of death.
And so Gandalf actually
has to die and come back
to be at that next level.
And when he comes back-- he
tells this very flippantly--
that there's nothing to fear.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah.
I love that scene.
We're going to look
at that clip later
because Gandalf really does die
when he falls into the abyss.
And that's why he has
trouble remembering his past
because he's not the same guy.
And I like the scene
where he presents
himself to Aragorn the first
time as the light wizard.
And you think it's Sauron.
Yeah, it's perfect
the way they did that.
And so Gandalf is
the chief wizard.
He is the guy who's ushering
in the next age, which
is why he has to leave at
the end of the whole film.
So he leaves and goes off
into the west with the elves.
>>DYER: Yes.
This is another important theme
is the lack of leadership.
The humans who are basically
destined to take over the next
age-- the elves are kind
of handing it over--
there's not a leader.
There's no honorable,
virtuous leadership.
And the elves know that
they can't stay any longer.
And when they're
handing it over,
we need some kind of leadership.
And that's where both Aragorn
and his royal bloodline
and the hobbits and
their humility--
as I said, a David and
Goliath-type story--
come into play to take on
that role of representing
virtuous leadership,
which is what
humans need in the
face of all the evil
that we deal with
in terms of our day
in that prophetic, predictive
programming sense of how
Tolkien's telling us about the
new world order and all that.
>>WEIDNER: And also
there's all the talk
today about bloodlines.
And these bloodlines say that
they have some ancient blood
in them, and that's what gives
them the priority for them
to rule over us.
And it's amazing that
Tolkien is including
this in when this was not
a big rumor in his day,
in the 40s when he
was writing this.
>>DYER: Right.
And as we're going to see,
that bloodline of Aragorn
is actually connected to
the tree that represents
his kingship at the White City.
And that tree is
actually dying, and it's
going to take on new life
when the King comes back.
The return of the
King, that's all
has a deep alchemical
significance
that we're going to get into.
But I think it's important
to consider temptation.
And that's the real
message of this ring
is it's going to be offered to
everybody in different forms.
Here it's, of course, power.
And even the queen of the
elves, even Galadriel herself,
is tempted to become this dark
goddess because it's almost
like the shade side
of your character,
and the Jungian
archetype takes over
if you give in to this, right?
And of course, she
overcomes the temptation.
So throughout the
film we're going
to see overcoming temptation,
beating those demons or devils.
Gandalf even does an exorcism in
this to the King of Rohan, who
is under the power of Sauron.
So let's look at the
temptation theme.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- In the place of a Dark
Lord you would have a Queen!
Not dark but beautiful
and terrible as the morn!
Treacherous as the seas!
Stronger than the
foundations of the Earth!
All shall love me and despair.
I passed the test.
I will diminish Go and go into
the west and remain Galadriel.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>DYER: You know, in many
hermetic and traditions,
you have the idea of taking on
a new name and a new identity
when you go through
that initiation.
And so for the higher level
controllers and watchers
in this film--
Gandalf, Galadriel--
their temptation
is happening at a way
different, extreme level
than what might be happening
to Aragorn or Frodo or Bilbo.
And so when she
passes this test,
she gets to remain herself.
She's no longer taken over
by this spiritual power.
And that is a message to us
that just like her or just
like Gandalf, just
like Sam and Frodo,
it's these simple virtues
that actually help us conquer
our own personal demons.
>>WEIDNER: I find it interesting
that after she succeeds
in not being tempted, she now
realizes that her time is over
here, as if she was
waiting to find out
what would happen when the ring
was finally presented to her.
>>DYER: Oh, interesting.
>>WEIDNER: And when
she finally did win--
succeed from being
tempted by the ring--
she now knew her place in this
end of the third age was over
and it was time
for her to leave.
But she'd succeeded,
by the way, impossibly
ascending to a higher
level of being.
>>DYER: Exactly.
Right.
Yeah, there's this weird
Madonna-whore complex going on
with Galadriel,
where she could turn
into this embodiment of the
dark side of the feminine nature
or remain a sort
of Marian image.
And when we first see her at
Lothlorien, the wood elves'
kingdom, she's presented in this
very Marian type of imagery.
And so she overcomes it
and remains who she is.
And I think we also
have to mention,
in the context of
temptation, Gollum.
Gollum is one of
the main characters
throughout the story,
and you don't expect it.
You're not expecting him
to be the major player
at the climax of the film.
But why do we have
this name Gollum?
Well, I think Tolkien
was very aware
that that's the medieval Jewish
mystical Kabbalistic name
for the creature that is kind
of a slave to the passions.
It's a completely mind control,
completely controlled being,
that has almost no free
will because it's enslaved
to some sort of master.
And that's what
Gollum represents
is the character in the
story who's a tragedy.
He doesn't succeed in
overcoming his temptation.
He remains a slave and
he's actually dissociative.
If you notice, there's
all these scenes
where he's split in his
mind, talking to himself.
Precious, right?
He can't overcome himself,
and so he represents tragedy,
which is also a warning for us.
>>WEIDNER: He doesn't
really have a personality.
He's trying to develop
one with these arguments
between himself, but there's
really nobody home there,
just like the Gollums
had no one home.
And the Gollums
almost always had
to be destroyed
at the end because
of their destructive nature.
And he destroys himself
in the end because
of, again, his greed.
>>DYER: So what we want to look
at next is clip number four.
This is the beginning of the
end and Frodo volunteering.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- Not ten thousand
men could you do this.
It is folly.
- Have you heard nothing
Lord Elrond has said?
The ring must be destroyed.
- And I suppose you think
you're the one to do it?
- And if we fail, what then?
What happens when Sauron
takes back what is his?
- I will be dead
before I see the ring
in the hands of an elf.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>WEIDNER: Well, this is
all about how the ring--
they're all in the
presence of the ring--
and they start fighting
each other, which
is exactly what Sauron
wants, has always wanted.
And that's how he
maintains his power.
And that's why I
included this clip,
because I wanted us to see
that this is what happens.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- [BLACK SPEECH]
[INTERPOSING VOICES AND
SHOUTING]
- I will take it!
I will take the ring to Mordor.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>WEIDNER: Well, Gandalf looks
sad that Frodo has volunteered.
That is the exact point of the
entire sequences leading up
to this moment, Gandalf
manipulating Frodo into taking
the ring back to Mordor.
>>DYER: The only reason that
Frodo and Sam are the ones that
can pull this off is
because, if you notice,
they're not interested
in the power.
They don't care about the power.
Everybody else,
all the other races
are all screaming and
squabbling over controlling
this ring of power, and if they
get the upper hand, you know,
they'll dominate.
And Frodo's sitting there and
watching this madness go down.
And that's what
impels him is that he
represents that, as I said,
David versus Goliath humility.
He's the only one
that can do this
because he's not going to
be bound by this slavery
to the lust for power.
>>WEIDNER: Well, at the
beginning of the film
they do the wonderful
sequence where they show
you Hobbitville and the Shire.
And you know right away that
they are not a materialist
people, the hobbits aren't.
>>DYER: It's very organic.
>>WEIDNER: They like
a good bottle of beer
and they like food
and they like to eat.
And they like their pipe-weed.
But other than that
they don't really care.
They don't want to know
about the rest of the world.
So they really were
the perfect people
to choose to make this endeavor.
Join us again next time as
we continue with "The Lord
of the Rings" Part Two.
>>DYER: I'm Jay Dyer.
>>WEIDNER: And I'm Jay Weidner.
And thanks for watching.
[THEME MUSIC]